adr: Adopting the Llama Stack Responses API for Agents (#1)
opendatahub-io/agents: adr/adr-responses-api.md

# ADR: Adopt Llama Stack Responses API for client-side Agent orchestration

## Context

Red Hat is developing an agentic capability for its AI platforms, including RHEL AI and Red Hat OpenShift AI (RHOAI). The core reasoning engine will leverage the Llama Stack. We are faced with a choice between two available APIs within Llama Stack for implementing agentic logic:

1. **Llama Stack Agents API:** An older API that provides an explicit `Agent` construct on the server. While this simplifies the management of agent definitions for the client, this API is not aligned with the broader AI ecosystem's direction.
2. **Llama Stack Responses API:** A newer API designed for compatibility with the OpenAI Responses API format. This API accepts a list of tools and a chat history and returns a model-generated response, which may include one or more tool calls. It does not provide a server-side `Agent` construct, requiring the client to manage the agent abstraction (tools, workflows, etc.).

> The strategic direction from the Llama Stack team is to prioritize the Responses API to maximize compatibility with the vast ecosystem of tools, SDKs, and developer knowledge built around the OpenAI API standard. The older Agents API could be deprecated, heavily refactored, or receive minimal future investment, posing a significant long-term risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The strategic direction from the Llama Stack team is to prioritize the Responses API to maximize compatibility with the vast ecosystem of tools, SDKs, and developer knowledge built around the OpenAI API de facto standard. The older Agents API could be deprecated, heavily refactored, or receive minimal future investment, posing a significant long-term risk.
```

> The core architectural question is: How can we build a robust, developer-friendly agentic framework on an API that does not provide an explicit `Agent` construct without sacrificing the usability that such a construct provides?

Reviewer 2: How much usability does the current Agent API provide over the Responses API? By usability do we just mean that it is simpler? How do we balance any added usability against loss of flexibility?

Author: > I think this may also be conflating client-side and server-side here.

The intended reading of the sentence is is conflating those two, but I can see how it is confusing.  The *question* is how do you build a good agent framework when the server API does not have an Agent construct and the *answers* that the document explores mostly do this by providing an client-side Agent construct.  I will rephrase to be more explicit.

> How much usability does the current Agent API provide over the Responses API?

I would say very little, but not none.  If you are just writing to those APIs without an SDK mediating, then Agent API has the advantage that you can define the agent once (by providing a list of tools) and then invoke it multiple times while the Responses API requires that you keep sending the agent definition (list of tools) to the server on every call.  That's potentially added complexity especially if your application calls the agent in multiple places in its code.  The obvious work around is for the client to have an Agent object that stores the list of tools and then you send the user query to that object that then passes it along with the list of tools it has stored to the Responses API.  That's pretty simple and easy -- it is basically what we're proposing here as the "Minimal Red Hat SDK".

One issue that is *not* in scope for this document and is not affected by this decision is whether tools will be invoked by the server or by the client.  For both APIs, it is the case that:

* MCP tools are invoked by the server.  The Responses API can be configured to get approval from the client before invoking the tool, but with either configuration, the tool is invoked by the server.
* "Hosted" or "built-in" tools are also invoked by the server.
* "Function" tools are invoked by the client.

So security and network access concerns for tool calling are outside of the scope of this document because they are the same concerns regardless of which API is used.

## Decision

We will adopt the OpenAI-compatible **Llama Stack Responses API** as the exclusive server interface for agentic reasoning within Red Hat's AI products.

> To address the absence of a server-side agent construct, we will need **a client-side Agent construct**. The decision about its form is addressed in [ADR: Adopt a Minimal SDK and Ecosystem Strategy for Agents](https://github.com/opendatahub-io/agents/pull/2). Some proposals include adding the functionality to the official Llama Stack client library, creating a new SDK maintained by Red Hat (perhaps as part of OpenDataHub), providing a container image with a simple HTTP API, and adopting a pre-existing SDK such as LangChain. That ADR will cover the pros and cons of these options and propose a final resolution.

Reviewer 2: I would say 'may want' rather than 'will need'.

Author: Hmm.  I believe all of the proposals listed in #2 currently include a client-side agent construct.  Do you have an alternative proposal for that one?  Or is the point just to leave it open here and resolve it there?

Reviewer 2: I'm saying, that in my view, the absence of a server side agent construct does not mean we then *need* a client-side Agent. We may or may not want one, which is the subject of #2. (In my view saying 'will need' is implicitly making a decision on #2).

Reviewer 3: I agree with @grs. Decisions about client side agents are outside of the scope of this ADR. I think with that correction, I am ready to approve this.

Reviewer 3: @jwm4 once you push these changes up, I am ready to approve this

> To address the absence of a server-side agent construct, we will need **a client-side Agent construct**.  To address the absence of a server-side agent construct, we will need **a client-side Agent construct**.  The decision about its form is addressed in [ADR: Adopt a Minimal SDK and Ecosystem Strategy for Agents](https://github.com/opendatahub-io/agents/pull/2). Some proposals include adding the functionality to the official Llama Stack client library, creating a new SDK maintained by Red Hat (perhaps as part of OpenDataHub), providing a container image with a simple HTTP API, and adopting a pre-existing SDK such as LangChain. That ADR will cover the pros and cons of these options and propose a final resolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address the absence of a server-side agent construct, we will need **a client-side Agent construct**.  The decision about its form is addressed in [ADR: Adopt a Minimal SDK and Ecosystem Strategy for Agents](https://github.com/opendatahub-io/agents/pull/2). Some proposals include adding the functionality to the official Llama Stack client library, creating a new SDK maintained by Red Hat (perhaps as part of OpenDataHub), providing a container image with a simple HTTP API, and adopting a pre-existing SDK such as LangChain. That ADR will cover the pros and cons of these options and propose a final resolution.
```

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

> * **Strategic Alignment & Future-Proofing:** By building on the OpenAI-compatible Responses API, we align with the industry standard and the strategic direction of Llama Stack. This de-risks our platform from the likely deprecation of the older Agents API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Strategic Alignment & Future-Proofing:** By building on the OpenAI-compatible Responses API, we align with the de facto industry standard and the strategic direction of Llama Stack. This de-risks our platform from any future changes to, or deprecation of, the Llama Stack Agents API.
```

Reviewer: I would say, whether or not the Agents API is deprecated, there is still value in basing our implementation on a lower level API. So, we don't need to bet on the Agents API being "likely" to be deprecated to make the decision.

> * **Ecosystem Compatibility:** Our agentic capability will be natively compatible with the vast ecosystem of tools, libraries, and monitoring solutions that are built to interface with the OpenAI API format. This accelerates both internal development and customer adoption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Ecosystem Compatibility:** Our agentic capability will be natively compatible with the vast ecosystem of tools, libraries, and monitoring solutions that are built to interface with the OpenAI API format. This accelerates both internal development and customer adoption.  For example, many agents are built with LangGraph today, and LangGraph can use the Responses API simply by setting a parameter: `use_responses_api=True`. Other popular agentic frameworks are also re-basing their underlying logic on the Responses API. 
* **Hybrid AI:**  By using the same fundamental API for both SaaS and on-premises agentic systems, customers can move their workloads from SaaS to self-hosted clusters without code changes.
```

> * **Enhanced Flexibility and Control:** A client-side agent construct gives the application developer full control over the agent's execution loop and tool selection. This is critical for complex, mission-critical applications where logic cannot be a black box on a server.

Reviewer 2: This isn't necessarily the case, it depends on the abstraction offered.

Reviewer: Perhaps add a bit more detail here - 
"The Responses API offers useful abstractions to simplify client-side code with its default settings, but also allows for fine-grained control over those abstractions, which makes it flexible enough for more complex applications."

Author: I added this text from @amfred but also softened the wording of the earlier text because I agree with @grs that it was overstated.

### Negative

* **Implementation/Support Overhead:** We assume the responsibility for implementing/supporting whatever client-side Agent construct emerges from [ADR: Adopt a Minimal SDK and Ecosystem Strategy for Agents](https://github.com/opendatahub-io/agents/pull/2).
* **Increased Client-side Complexity:** The logic for managing the agent's definition and execution loop now resides on the client. While our chosen Agent construct will abstract this away, the fundamental complexity is shifted from the Llama Stack server to the client. We must ensure our chosen solution is robust, performant, and easy to use. Clients must handle security, availability, and failure recovery, which becomes harder when the client owns the agent definition.  Some clients will be deployed as servers that require auto-scaling and lifecycle management.  Managing the agent object client-side can encourage this “client-as-server” pattern so multiple end-users can share the same agent, further complicating the overall architecture.

> * **Difficulty in Sharing and Collaboration:** A server-side agent can be exposed as a persistent, shareable endpoint. A client-side agent, however, exists only within the context of the application that instantiated it. To "share" an agent, one must serialize its configuration, transfer it, and have the recipient re-instantiate a new agent from that data. This "snapshot-and-restore" process creates friction for use cases requiring pre-configured, easily shareable bots or live collaborative agents. (Note: The containerized API proposal could mitigate this, which will be analyzed in the next ADR).

Reviewer: Note that Llama Stack Agents as they are defined today can't actually be serialized, rehydrated, and used on a different server.  We would need to implement that.  There is a request from the Lightspeed teams to be able to port an agent from one Llama Stack to another in this way.  What they really want to port over is the context, configuration, and conversation memory. We can just as well implement that support in the Responses API.

# ADR: Adopt Llama Stack Responses API for client-side Agent orchestration

## Context

Red Hat is developing an agentic capability for its AI platforms, including RHEL AI and Red Hat OpenShift AI (RHOAI). The core reasoning engine will leverage the Llama Stack. We are faced with a choice between two available APIs within Llama Stack for implementing agentic logic:

1. **Llama Stack Agents API:** An older API that provides an explicit, stateful `Agent` construct on the server. The server manages the agent's state and conversation history within a `session`. While this simplifies state management for the client, this API is not aligned with the broader AI ecosystem's direction.

> 2. **Llama Stack Responses API:** A newer, stateless API designed for compatibility with the OpenAI Responses API format. This API accepts a list of tools and a chat history and returns a model-generated response, which may include one or more tool calls. It does not provide a server-side `Agent` or `session` construct, requiring the client to manage the state of the interaction.

Reviewer 4: I don't think you can consider Responses API to be stateless. It still retains your history as a state, so you can refer to it at any time later.

The strategic direction from the Llama Stack team is to prioritize the Responses API to maximize compatibility with the vast ecosystem of tools, SDKs, and developer knowledge built around the OpenAI API standard. The older Agents API could be deprecated, heavily refactored, or receive minimal future investment, posing a significant long-term risk.

> The core architectural question is: How can we build a robust, developer-friendly agentic framework on a stateless API without sacrificing the usability that an explicit `Agent` construct provides?

Reviewer 4: Why not reuse _existing_ client-side frameworks that can interact with the OpenAI Responses API, like e.g. langchain? I don't see the need for an own client-side agentic SDK even when we switch to the Responses API. The issue with our own SDK is to convince people that this client lib is better for them than any other agent framework. It's like fighting against Spring Boot (which we did with Quarkus but that was and is for sure not the easiest fight).

## Decision

We will adopt the **Llama Stack Responses API** as the exclusive backend interface for agentic reasoning within Red Hat's AI products.

> To address the absence of a server-side agent object, we will **design and implement a client-side Agent construct**. This client-side agent construct will be responsible for:

Reviewer 3: I think it may be best to just defer this decision making process to: https://github.com/opendatahub-io/agents/pull/2/files

Reviewer 5: I think that the decision of the API shape to adopt is one decision, and the existence of a server-side `Agent` abstraction is an independent one. Each can go either way independently of the other, at least in principle.

Author: @iamemilio , the text is intended to say that we're deferring the decision process of what would replace it to 2, but I will try to tweak the wording to be more explicit.

> * **State Management:** Maintaining the conversation history (user messages, AI responses, tool outputs).
> * **Agentic Loop:** Orchestrating the turn-by-turn interaction with the Llama Stack Responses API. This involves:
>     1. Formatting the current state (chat history, available tools) into a request.
>     2. Sending the request to the API endpoint.
>     3. Parsing the API response to distinguish between textual replies and tool call requests.
>     4. Executing any requested tool calls using client-side or remote tooling.
>     5. Formatting the tool execution results.
>     6. Appending the tool results to the history and repeating the loop until a final answer is generated or a stop condition is met.
> * **Tool Dispatching:** Managing the registration and invocation of available tools on the client side.
> 
> The decision of what form this client-side Agent construct will take will be addressed in a subsequent ADR. Some proposals include adding the functionality to the official Llama Stack client library, creating a new SDK maintained by Red Hat (perhaps as part of OpenDataHub), providing a container image with a simple HTTP API, and adopting a pre-existing SDK such as LangChain. That ADR will cover the pros and cons of these options and propose a final resolution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The decision of what form this client-side Agent construct will take will be addressed in a subsequent [ADR](https://github.com/opendatahub-io/agents/pull/2/files).
```

Author: Hmm.  This seems a big extreme, but I am OK with it if there is no objection.  Let's see if anyone pushes back.

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

* **Strategic Alignment & Future-Proofing:** By building on the OpenAI-compatible Responses API, we align with the industry standard and the strategic direction of Llama Stack. This de-risks our platform from the likely deprecation of the older Agents API.
* **Ecosystem Compatibility:** Our agentic capability will be natively compatible with the vast ecosystem of tools, libraries, and monitoring solutions that are built to interface with the OpenAI API format. This accelerates both internal development and customer adoption.

> * **Enhanced Flexibility and Control:** A client-side agent construct gives the application developer full control over the agent's execution loop, state, and tool implementation. This is critical for complex, mission-critical applications where logic cannot be a black box on a server.

Reviewer 4: True, but is it up to us to create that client-side agent framework or should we settle on an existing one?

* **Clear Separation of Concerns:** The Llama Stack server is responsible for what it does best: executing LLM inference with tool-calling capabilities. The client is responsible for the application-level concern of orchestrating the agentic logic. This is a clean and scalable architectural pattern.

> * **Stateless Backend:** A stateless API is inherently more scalable, resilient, and easier to manage from an operations perspective. It eliminates concerns about server-side session memory, replication, and expiry.

Reviewer 6: Yes - it feels like the team might need more hands-on experience with the Responses API and Agents API to really understand how they compare. Agents API is a model closer to the OpenAI Assistants API, which was their prior API that is now being deprecated in favor of Responses. But, we should understand why the Agents/Assistants APIs existed, what they solved, and why Responses is the next natural evolution of those types of APIs.

> ### Negative

Reviewer 4: As advantages of a purely server-side agentic engine (which probably should be listed under "Negative" here) I can also see the following points:

* A LLS instance could reach other remote services than a client-side agent, maybe even with elevated cluster-privileges that a client might not have. This might or might be not an issue (probably not, when _every_ communication goes over the Responses API and no other service is needed, like direct remote tool calling)
* Many non-functional requirements need to be implemented by the client on its own, while a LLS instance can provide this OOTB, things like security, high-availability, recovery, auto-scaling, .... (for more related non-functional requirements see this [list](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CRtZAGZclSSgiTDNsZlmv6XRO8HZBVFsV6oDbo1FwuE)
* OAuth2 with OIDC flow needs to be implemented by the client, too (if the framework doesn't support this), while a server-side instance can initiate that auth flow.

Author: > A LLS instance could reach other remote services than a client-side agent, maybe even with elevated cluster-privileges that a client might not have. This might or might be not an issue (probably not, when every communication goes over the Responses API and no other service is needed, like direct remote tool calling)

Yes, I think also that this is probably not an issue.  Whether the "agent" abstraction lives on the client or the server is basically separate from whether the tools are called by the client or the server.  In either case, as I understand it, MCP and hosted tools are called by the server and "function" tools are called by the client.

> Many non-functional requirements need to be implemented by the client on its own, while a LLS instance can provide this OOTB, things like security, high-availability, recovery, auto-scaling, ....

I think there are probably cases where this could be true and other cases where it is not.  For example, if the agent abstraction is embedded in the client application, then it doesn't really need auto-scaling: the fact that each client has their own does the scaling for the abstraction (and the stuff behind the Responses API can still be independently auto-scaled as needed).  However, if the agent abstraction lives in a shim in between each client application and the actual LLS server then I agree it could potentially need its own autoscaling.

> OAuth2 with OIDC flow needs to be implemented by the client, too (if the framework doesn't support this), while a server-side instance can initiate that auth flow.

I don't see why this would be different for the Requests API than it would be for the Agents API since the MCP tools are called by the server in both cases.  Am I missing something?

Reviewer 4: > I don't see why this would be different for the Requests API than it would be for the Agents API since the MCP tools are called by the server in both cases. Am I missing something?

Agreed, its a weak argument.  What I meant is that the LLS server will instantiate the OAuth2 handshake to obtain the initial token when using the agent API. But this is also true, when using the Responses API you can do this as well, so I guess you can forget my reasoning here :)

> * **Implementation Overhead:** We assume the responsibility for implementing or integrating the client-side Agent construct. This requires dedicated engineering resources, whether for building, testing, or vetting and supporting a third-party solution.

Reviewer 7: What do you mean by third-party here? is this ADR assuming its not llama stack where you propose that agent abstraction?

* **Difficulty in Sharing and Collaboration:** A server-side agent can be exposed as a persistent, shareable endpoint. A client-side agent, however, exists only within the context of the application that instantiated it. To "share" an agent, one must serialize its configuration and state, transfer it, and have the recipient re-instantiate a new agent from that data. This "snapshot-and-restore" process creates friction for use cases requiring pre-configured, easily shareable bots or live collaborative agents. (Note: The containerized API proposal could mitigate this, which will be analyzed in the next ADR).
* **Potential for State Inconsistency:** As the client is the source of truth for the agent's state, developers using our solution must correctly manage this state. The design of our chosen Agent construct should provide strong guardrails to prevent common errors.

> * **Deferred Decision:** The critical decision on the form and implementation of the Agent construct must be resolved in a timely manner to avoid development bottlenecks.

Reviewer 7: Do we talk about auth somewhere?

Author: No.  Is there anything in particular you want to address relating to auth?
